[WHOOSH]
[THEME MUSIC]
>>HARRY ADELSON:
We have stem cells
in all the tissues in
our body, and their role
is to maintain the health
of their microenvironment.
So how healthy
you are is largely
determined by the function
of your stem cells
and the population
of stem cells.
Fetal stem cells,
like, no one uses them.
It's just not a thing.
Embryonic stem cells,
it's so primitive
that it tends to turn
into all different kinds
of weird things.
So the cells that we
mostly use therapeutically
are what are called
mesenchymal stem cells.
When you inject stem cells
into the skin of the face,
it improves elasticity
and hydration,
which doesn't give
this dramatic look.
People just sort of say, oh--
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
You slept well.
>>ADELSON: That's
exactly what they say.
>>REGINA: One of the
most exciting areas
of advanced medicine
has been stem cells.
There was a big storm about
the subject a decade ago or so
over the sources of
the cells, but much
has happened since
then, and there's still
a very bright light in
the future of medicine.
Dr. Harry Adelson
is with us today
to give us an update of where
we are with stem cells today.
Welcome.
>>ADELSON: Thank you so much.
It's such a pleasure
to be here with you.
>>REGINA: It really
truly-- it's the future.
It's part of the
future of medicine.
It's an exciting subject.
And before we get
into how it works--
because it does seem like magic,
it seems like there's some kind
of divine orchestration
that our cells do--
let's talk about you.
And I know just a
tiny bit about you
in that you were a rock
climber, and this seems
to be important to this story.
We've got the beautiful
Flatiron Mountains there.
A lot of people climb
rocks, but stuff happens.
So take it away, Harry,
and tell us what happened.
>>ADELSON: Well,
my journey actually
started right here in Boulder,
Colorado, on those Flatirons.
>>REGINA: Oh, really?
>>ADELSON: That's where I fell
in love with rock climbing.
I was straight out
of McGill University,
and I moved here to
learn how to rock climb
and to try to figure out what
I wanted to be when I grew up.
And I ended up getting sick.
I sort of came down with
like a mono or something.
And I was seeing this
chiropractor here in Boulder.
And I don't think that he really
helped me, but I liked him,
and I liked what he did.
And so I started
looking into sort
of chiropractic school versus
conventional medical school.
And I was deciding
which route to go,
and I saw an ad
in "Yoga Journal"
for the Southwest College of
Naturopathic Medicine which
listed the six
guiding principles
of naturopathic medicine,
the first of which
being vis medicatrix
naturae, which
is the Latin term for the
healing power of nature.
Well, I completely fell in
love with these six guiding
principles.
Went to naturopathic school.
And in my first year, I
was training for my dream
climbing trip to France, the
birthplace of modern sport
climbing.
And I was doing this hard
cross-through move in the gym,
and I felt this revolting
pop in my shoulder.
>>REGINA: Ooh.
You don't like the pop.
No one likes that pop.
>>ADELSON: Yeah.
I saw a surgeon and he said,
well, you've torn your labrum.
You've torn the cartilage
in your shoulder.
I can put a scope in
there and cut it away.
It'll help you in
the short term,
but it's going to cause
you problems later in life.
Well, this didn't make any
sense to me, because here I was,
young, healthy, in
naturopathic school,
learning naturopathic medicine.
And I felt like there had to be
a way to treat this naturally.
So I started asking around.
And this was back
in the early '90s
when research meant you
actually had to talk to people.
And I found out
about Rick Marinelli
who was the first
naturopathic doctor
to perform prolotherapy,
which is also called
regenerative injection therapy.
And regenerative
injection therapy
is the injection of
natural substances
that are simultaneously
nutritive
and slightly irritating.
So they--
>>REGINA: Well,
give us an example
of what that cocktail
might be like.
>>ADELSON: It's usually
a 10% or 12.5% dextrose.
So it's a sugar water.
>>REGINA: Sugar water.
OK.
What's on top of it?
>>ADELSON: Well, that's it.
That's it.
And a little bit of
local anesthetic.
>>REGINA: You're kidding.
>>ADELSON: As
naturopaths, we would
use a little bit of glucosamine,
sulfate, and a little B12.
>>REGINA: What is
it about sugar that
has that regenerative capacity?
>>ADELSON: Well,
after oxygen, sugar
is the most important
nutrient to cells.
So it's nutritive, but it's
also slightly irritating,
because at that percentage,
it's hypertonic,
so it's slightly irritating.
>>REGINA: Is it kind of acidic?
I mean, is that even
a part of it, or--
>>ADELSON: It's not so much the
acidity as the concentration
of the solution.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ADELSON: So--
>>REGINA: So you're injecting a
saturated amount into an area.
>>ADELSON: Yeah.
So you're essentially
tricking the body
into thinking that it's been
injured without actually
causing any tissue
insult. So you're
launching the body's natural
healing ability without having
been injured.
And I had it done to me,
and it worked so well
that I knew that's what I
wanted to do as a career.
My trip to France was splendid.
>>REGINA: How long
did it take to heal?
>>ADELSON: Two months.
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>ADELSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: With no lasting
damage, unlike what
would have happened
with surgery.
>>ADELSON: That's right.
>>REGINA: Wow.
So when I got out of my hospital
residency, I went into practice
and just practiced
regenerative injection therapy,
and I thought that's all I would
do for the rest of my career.
And then in 2006,
platelet-rich plasma
came along, which is sort
of a biologic version
of prolotherapy.
You do a blood draw, spin
the blood in a centrifuge,
concentrate down
the blood platelets.
Now, platelets are what are
responsible for clotting
after an injury.
But once they clot, they
release growth factors
such as platelet-derived
growth factor.
>>REGINA: And is that that kind
of yellowish fluid that's left
when you spin it, or--
>>ADELSON: Well, the
yellow fluid is the serum.
So when you spin
it down, on the top
you've got the yellow fluid.
On the bottom you've
got the red blood cells,
because they're the heaviest
because of the iron content.
But then in the middle,
you have the buffy layer.
And that contains
the white cells,
but it also contains
the platelets.
>>REGINA: OK.
OK.
>>ADELSON: And
platelets are what
are responsible for triggering
healing after injury.
So I started using
that, and I found
that it worked much better
than the dextrose solution.
Instead of getting the
job done in 10 to 12
prolotherapy treatments, we
were getting the job done
in four to six PRP treatments.
>>REGINA: Wow.
That's significant.
>>ADELSON: So for a period of
four years, that's all I did.
And I thought that was
all I was going to do
for the rest of my career.
>>REGINA: You were happy.
>>ADELSON: That's right.
And then in 2009, one of my
favorite patients, a woman
named Laura came to me.
And she had this painful
knee from this bad injury
that she had sustained.
And we had been treating
her for a number of years
with prolotherapy and then PRP.
And I was getting her
to a certain level,
but we just couldn't seem
to get beyond that level.
And she was a very,
very smart woman.
And she walked into my office
with a stack of papers,
dropped them on my desk
and she was she said,
I want you to inject stem
cells from my bone marrow
into my knee.
And the stack of papers
was animal studies
of bone marrow stem cells.
And I said, Laura, you know,
I don't know how to do that.
And she said, well, learn.
>>REGINA: Learn.
[LAUGHS]
>>ADELSON: And I said, Laura,
you know, I'm a naturopath.
Do you-- do you know
how much criticism
I'll get if I start doing
bone marrow aspirations?
And she looked at
me and she said,
well, I'm a materials engineer
for NASA, and I'm a woman.
So if you want to complain to
me about people telling you
that you're out of
your league, I'm
afraid you're talking
to the wrong person.
>>REGINA: I love it.
She put you in your place.
>>ADELSON: I couldn't
argue with that.
>>REGINA: Right.
So did you have to
learn how to do this?
>>ADELSON: Yes.
Yes.
So I found a surgeon who
was willing to teach me
how to perform a bone
marrow aspiration.
I started doing it, and I was
so blown away with the results.
I knew that was what
I was going to do.
>>REGINA: And you're committed.
You're passionate
about it, and it
appears that it works a good
amount of the time, right?
>>ADELSON: Yes.
>>REGINA: We're going to talk
about where it really works,
where it doesn't work so well.
But first of all, let's talk
about now the stem cell--
stem cell history itself in
terms of where it's been,
because most people think--
they've seen these pictures
of fetuses and, like, ah!
You know?
And they develop this fear
over it to begin with.
That made it to mainstream
news for a while there
and people kind of dialed
out, but that's not
where the story
really began or ended.
So let's talk about the
real history of stem cells,
where the fetuses
initially came in, what
other sources besides bone
marrow, which you just
brought up.
We have resources of
it and all the way
through down to umbilical cords.
>>ADELSON: Sure.
Sure.
Well, how fetuses
accidentally got in there--
and you know, like most areas
of knowledge in the world,
there's a tremendous amount
of disinformation out there.
But the reason we sort of
got into this conversation
about fetuses was because
the early stem cell research
was embryonic stem cells.
And now the reason for that
is because in those days,
it was mostly researchers
who are PhDs, not MDs, doing
the research.
And for those guys,
they have easy access
to embryonic stem
cells, because they just
go to in vitro
fertilization labs
and they've got freezers
and freezers filled
of these embryonic stem cells.
So it's very easy for
them to retrieve those.
The issue with
that is an embryo--
now remember, first you have the
zygote, which is the two cells.
And then you have this
clump of eight cells,
which is the embryo.
And then way down the line
you have a fetus, which
looks like a human.
It looks like-- at first,
it looks like a tadpole.
>>REGINA: A lot happens
between those two points.
>>ADELSON: That's right.
That's right.
So fetal stem cells
is not a thing.
They're not used for--
like, no one uses them.
It's just not a thing.
Embryonic stem cells is used
now in research purposes,
but it's never really
been used therapeutically,
because it's just--
it's so primitive
that it tends to turn
into all different
kinds of weird things.
>>REGINA: Well,
that's interesting,
because a lot of people
are left with the notion
that embryonic
stem cells are used
in some of these therapies.
And what you just
said is interesting,
that it seems to have this
weird effect of turning
into all kinds of things.
Now, I think of it--
when I think of it,
it's an embryo is forming
into a human being
and has all this potential for
differentiation of these stem
cells.
And so are you saying that
from that point of view,
it's too chaotic and
incoherent still?
>>ADELSON: We don't know how
to put it on the right pathway,
because it's very complex.
When it's in nature and it's
an embryo turning into a fetus,
which then there's--
it knows which way to go in
God's infinite wisdom and all
that.
>>REGINA: But in looking at it
in a laboratory, it's like, ah!
>>ADELSON: Exactly.
We don't understand
the inner workings
well enough to ease it
in the right direction.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ADELSON: So the
cells that we mostly
use therapeutically are what are
called mesenchymal stem cells.
>>REGINA: OK, what are those?
>>ADELSON: Mesenchymal
stem cells,
that phrase was coined by a
researcher named Arnold Caplan.
And he now says that he
wished he had called them
met medicinal signaling cells.
>>REGINA: That would
have been nicer.
Little easier on the tongue.
>>ADELSON: That's right.
And it's also more descriptive
of what it actually does.
>>REGINA: So where
do they come from,
and how are they more coherent?
>>ADELSON: Sure.
So the thing to remember
about stem cells
is they have-- what defines
a stem cell is its ability
to either differentiate
or self-replicate.
When it self-replicates,
it turns
into another version of itself.
When it differentiates, it
turns into a target tissue cell.
We used to think that was the
main therapeutic application.
The mesenchymal stem cell has
a second superhuman power,
which is called
paracrine signaling,
or also called the
paracrine effect.
And what that is is
when a mesenchymal stem
cell comes into contact
with damaged cells.
It recognizes the fact that
it's in the presence of damaged
cells and it releases
growth factors
to signal to those
cells to heal themselves
for new, healthy
blood vessels to form.
And also, it fights
infection and inflammation.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
Now, where are these
cells harvested from?
>>ADELSON: Where you find
mesenchymal stem cells,
you have to understand,
mesenchymal stem cells
are Superman, but they exist
in the Clark Kent form.
So before they become
mesenchymal stem cells,
they are pericytes.
Pericytes are the cells that
wrap around blood vessels.
So when you have
vasoconstriction
and vasodilation,
that's the action
of the pericytes
squeezing and relaxing
around the blood vessel.
When you have medications that
affect the blood pressure,
they're exerting their
effect on the pericytes.
When a pericyte-- when there's
an injury and a platelet
recognizes that it's no
longer inside a blood vessel,
it releases this
signaling protein,
platelet-derived growth factor.
When the pericyte
comes into contact
with platelet-derived
growth factor,
it detaches from the
blood vessel and morphs
into a mesenchymal stem cell.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Well, OK, how do you get them?
How do you harvest them?
>>ADELSON: Well, the two areas
where it's easy to harvest
and relatively easy to
concentrate and isolate
are from bone
marrow and from fat.
>>REGINA: Like adipose tissue?
>>ADELSON: Yes.
>>REGINA: Right.
Which is kind of the brown
fat tissue of the body,
or-- is that the brown fat
tissue of the body, adipose?
Can be white or brown?
>>ADELSON: It can be either.
>>REGINA: OK.
All right.
So that I've heard
more about recently
in the field of kind
of beauty regeneration,
for example, where
you have doctors
who practice various
aesthetician type of procedures
beyond that,
cosmetic procedures.
And there's a whole field that's
blooming in terms of grooming
one's own stem cells to reuse.
I don't know how they do it or
what happens at the end of it,
but I think it's
intriguing, and I
would love to have you tell
us more about that in a minute
too.
But so now we're going to
go back to where you are,
which is pain, damage to
the body, worn out parts.
Do you find that the
stem cell therapy--
you're using the
mesenchymal cells--
work better on people
who are younger
and have tissue damage,
but their vital--
kind of their
vitality heals faster
and has a good
hold versus people
whose parts are wearing out?
Because I know one lady--
I'm just saying anecdotally--
I know one lady who is super
optimistic, wonderful, great
health, doing yoga
into her early 80s,
but her knees were
just worn out.
And she did a lot of
stem cell therapy,
and it seemed to work
for a little bit,
and then it didn't work anymore.
So let's talk about
the advantages
and where these
cutoff points are,
knowing that we're
all highly individual.
>>ADELSON: Right.
So I started out using
bone marrow stem cells,
because that's sort
of the gold standard.
It's what's been
around the longest.
Then I learned how
to lipoaspirate,
take small volumes of fat
and isolate the stem cells.
And I started combining the two.
And my experience is when you
combine bone marrow stem cells
with fat stem cells, that's
where I get the best results.
So for a period of years,
I would combine those two.
And what I found was that
patients under, say, 40 or 50
did consistently well.
But above the 40 to 50 range, it
was a little more hit or miss.
Sometimes people would do
great, and other times it just
didn't work as well.
Well, then exosomes
hit the scene.
>>REGINA: Exosomes.
>>ADELSON: Yes.
So let's just back
up a little bit.
So with stem cells, there's
two main categories.
There's autologous, which
is from your own body,
and there's allogenic,
which is from a donor.
So when we're talking
about stem cells
from your bone marrow and
fat, that's autologous.
That's donor and recipient
are the same person.
What makes my stem cell,
52-year-old stem cells
is as we age, our own stem
cells lose the ability
to manufacture these vesicles
filled with growth factors that
are called exosomes.
That's actually the
active ingredient.
If we go back to
cellular biology 101
and we look at a cell,
it's the cell membrane
comprised of the bilipid layer.
Then you've got
the nucleus, which
contains the genetic
material, the Golgi
apparatus, and the
mitochondria, and then there's
these little vesicles.
And we used to think that
that was the cellular waste.
We used to think that that
was sort of cellular poop,
if you will.
Well, what we discovered is that
actually is the communicating
proteins that give
the mesenchymal stem
cells their ability to
perform the paracrine effect,
their paracrine signaling.
So as we age, what
makes my stem cells
52-year-old stem cells
is we lose the ability
to manufacture these
vesicles filled with growth
factors called exosomes.
So there are labs that
take these very young,
robust placental stem cells.
>>REGINA: Right.
And that's what-- you're
answering everything
before I'm asking it.
That's just the trajectory
I was hoping you'd go on.
OK.
So now we're into
those placental cells.
OK.
>>ADELSON: So either
placental or umbilical.
>>REGINA: Umbilical.
Mm-hmm.
>>ADELSON: The only thing that
I'm not crazy about with those
types of cells is when you
give the whole stem cell,
you're giving--
you're introducing somebody
else's genetic material.
>>REGINA: That's what I was
going to ask about next too.
You're right on it.
So what happens in
terms of compatibility?
>>ADELSON: Well, we think it's
safe, but we really don't know,
you know?
It just hasn't been used
long enough to know for sure,
you know?
We think that they sort of are
immune to any sort of response.
However, you can have a
graft versus host disease
from a bone marrow transfusion,
like, two years later.
So I'm a little nervous
about using umbilical cord
or placental stem cells.
But with the exosomes, what
these laboratories do--
and the reason I prefer
it is because what they do
is they take these
young stem cells,
and they put them in a
stressful culture medium
to basically make the cell think
that its host is under duress.
So it manufactures and
excretes these exosomes.
Then they put it in a very
high-speed centrifuge.
Not just a normal
desktop centrifuge.
Big laboratory centrifuges.
The stem cells go to the bottom.
The exosomes go to the top.
So now you've separated
the active ingredient
from the other person's genetic
material, the cell where
the nucleus exists.
And what we do is
we add the exosomes
to the person's own stem cells.
And what we think happens is
that the stem cells envelop
these exosomes into
themselves, thereby
functionally making
the person's stem
cell that of a younger person.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
OK.
Now, I brought it up.
I just touched on
it a little bit ago.
When using the umbilical
cord stem cells, one area--
my understanding
that has grown is
harvesting that right
after birth and banking
it for the future of that
person, that child, that baby.
Have you-- what's
happened with that field?
>>ADELSON: Well,
>>REGINA: That makes--
>>ADELSON: That field
is very alive and well.
>>REGINA: It makes
sense, but does it?
I mean, how does it work?
>>ADELSON: The one
sort of downside
is that these stem cell banks
are very tightly regulated.
And really, the only way you
can withdraw the cells is it has
to be the person who donated
them comes down with a very
specific, short list of
diseases, usually cancer-type--
cancer-type conditions.
>>REGINA: Oh, really?
So you can't use
it for your knees.
Like, you had it in
the bank for 60 years
and now your knees are going--
>>ADELSON: Unfortunately, no.
>>REGINA: Oh, see,
that's interesting.
>>ADELSON: Yeah, unfortunately.
>>REGINA: Why is it so-- why are
they regulating it so if it's
your body and your stem cells?
>>ADELSON: Well,
that's a good question.
The FDA considers your
cells to be a drug
and a non-FDA-approved drug.
>>REGINA: Now,
let's talk about how
it can be used for spinal
injury and spinal damage
and degeneration,
because a lot of people
suffer from spinal
issues and pain.
>>ADELSON: That's right.
Low back pain is the leading
cause of disability worldwide.
If you look at the economic
impact of low back pain,
it's greater than heart disease,
diabetes, and cancer combined.
>>REGINA: And doesn't that
put a lot of people into that
dangerous territory of a thing--
the opioid drugs?
>>ADELSON: Yes, exactly.
>>REGINA: Range of drugs that
they can become habituated--
>>ADELSON: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ADELSON: Opioid drugs
are great for sort
of post-surgery
or acute injuries.
It's great for people
who are dying of cancer.
But as a long-term therapy for
low back pain, what it does is
it completely sets
your brain's ability
to interpret pain on its head
and lowers your pain threshold.
So even if your
pain isn't that bad,
if you take narcotics
long enough,
your pain threshold
goes so low that even
if the original cause of
the pain has resolved,
you're just in pain.
>>REGINA: You need
more and more.
>>ADELSON: Right.
>>REGINA: And then
you have the crisis
that we have in this
country, for example.
>>ADELSON: Exactly.
Exactly.
>>REGINA: And-- yeah.
OK.
So let's move beyond opioids.
>>ADELSON: Sure.
So one of the things to keep
in mind with low back pain
is if you look at MRIs of people
with no low back pain, people
who've never had low back
pain, 60% of those people
will have abnormalities on MRI.
15% will have abnormalities
so significant
that if they had corresponding
symptoms, which they
don't, they would be candidates
for immediate emergency
surgery.
Similarly, you'll see people
with terrible low back pain
whose MRIs looked
perfectly normal.
So this really calls into
question the value of the MRI.
In 2011, the American
College of Physicians,
which is like the granddaddy
of all medical organizations,
issued a position paper
discouraging doctors
from ordering MRI
for low back pain,
because all it really
does is send the patient
down some dangerous and
expensive rabbit holes.
It's been proven that performing
an MRI on low back pain, all
it does is guarantee that
the cost of the treatment
will be higher.
It doesn't improve
the outcomes at all.
The exceptions are if
somebody-- if you suspect cancer
or if someone has some sort of
neurologic deficit like a drop
foot.
But for just regular
low back pain,
the MRI gives you
all this information,
but most of that
information is not useful.
So that kind of makes us shift
from the macroscopic pain
generator to the
microscopic tissues.
And what we think, people in my
field in regenerative medicine,
we think most of
back pain is caused
by changes in the microscopic
connective tissue.
So you have irregularities
in the collagen matrix.
You have the hyper-production of
these irregularly formed blood
vessels.
Every time you grow
a new blood vessel,
you grow another sensory
nerve, so now you
have a hyper-concentration
of sensory nerves.
And these are irregularly
formed blood vessels.
So you've actually
lost the ability
to bring oxygen to the area
and metabolic waste away.
So it's almost like
a hypoxic pain.
So one of the things that
we know that stem cell
therapy does is turn
damaged scar tissue
into normal, healthy tissue.
And the reason we know
that is because one
of the areas that has the
strongest amount of research
is in wound care.
Wound care is very
easy to study,
because the person has an
ulcer, and either it heals or it
doesn't.
Right.
And what happens when
you inject stem cells
into a non-healing
ulcer is first you
grow these new, healthy
collagen matrixes,
you grow these
healthy blood vessels,
and then you grow skin over top.
So that's what we
think is happening.
The two areas where I find we
really get the best outcomes
are desiccated discs and
post-whiplash syndrome.
Desiccated disc is a dehydration
of the intervertebral disc.
A dry-- it's a dry disc, and
a dry disc is a painful disk.
When we put stem cells into
the intervertebral disc,
it's really my favorite thing
to treat for two reasons.
One, because the conventional
treatment is terrible.
The conventional treatment
really is fusion.
There is no good
conventional treatment.
And the other reason I
love it is because it just
seems to be so effective.
When I get these sort of
25-year-old, 35-year-old
with a weightlifting injury
and they've got this black disc
on MRI, meaning it's dehydrated,
conventionally, there's
really nothing to
be done for that.
And that's where I find stem
cell therapy really shines.
The other area's in
post-whiplash syndrome.
And post-whiplash
syndrome is sort of
like a tennis elbow
of your neck, right?
You have this chaotic
collagen matrixes.
You have this
hyper-concentration
of blood vessels.
It's just like scar
tissue in your neck.
And when we inject stem cells
into those soft tissues,
I find that very
frequently, people
get massive pain reduction,
increased quality of life,
and increased activities
of daily living.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Well, going back to the big
issue, the lower back pain--
I'm just going to
toss this out there.
You don't have to comment on it.
But I interview a lot of
different types of people.
The show's "Open Minds," right?
And I have interviewed
quite a few people that
do mind-body medicine as well.
And lower back pain is
the one most associated
with fear and insecurity.
A fear.
Just fear, fear,
fear where the being
starts collapsing into it.
Like, it can't hold its
own weight up anymore
on an emotional level.
Which I find interesting
next to what you just said,
because it's not obvious.
You can't tell from
physical symptoms
whether that should
be there or not.
So there's some other
underlying driving conditions
that are assisting the
development of that pain.
So that's a whole
separate subject,
but it's interesting,
because what you're saying
kind of validates that, right?
>>ADELSON: Yeah.
Well, there was a
very famous doctor
named John Sarno,
who unfortunately
is no longer with us.
But he did a lot of the
original research in a condition
that he termed tension
myositis syndrome.
And he felt that the
majority of low back pain
was caused by suppressed
emotions, specifically
suppressed anger.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
>>ADELSON: He actually
cured my dad of back pain.
And it's kind of a
long story, but--
>>REGINA: Oh, I want to hear it.
This is interesting.
>>ADELSON: My dad had
this severe episode
of low back pain.
And I mean he was
really, really de--
>>REGINA: Debilitated.
>>ADELSON: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
[LAUGHS]
>>ADELSON: He was
really debilitated,
and no one could
figure out what it was.
Well, it turns out at
the time, my grandmother
was really spiraling
into dementia.
And sort of deep down on
the subconscious level,
my dad was angry at his
mother for getting sick.
And that's sort of--
to say that out loud, it's
sort of terrible to say.
>>REGINA: Well, I mean, and
did part of him almost feel
abandoned or burdened or all
those things that come with
Alzheimer's?
It's tough.
>>ADELSON: We'd have to ask him.
But once he recognized
that and sort of just
gave it a name, his back
pain completely resolved.
>>REGINA: There you go.
>>ADELSON: So I'm
a strong believer
that emotions absolutely
can cause back pain,
neck pain, any sort of pain.
I don't think it's the
only cause of back pain.
Some of my-- I get a
lot of combat veterans.
You know, guys who were blown
up in a Humvee and their spines
compressed.
I mean, and then they've
got a black disc on MRI.
So you know, I think--
>>REGINA: Well, and even
just sleeping improperly
can cause a stress over time
that has this kind of buildup
you're talking about.
So OK, so that remains a little
bit elusive, lower back pain.
[LAUGHS] OK.
So let's talk about
how stem cells
are used now in the field
of beauty regeneration.
I mean, holy cow.
I see people on TV and
I think, this woman
looks younger than she did
40 years ago, you know?
And there are a lot of
ways people do that,
and some of it's very
obvious and it's kind of--
they're unrecognizable.
But with others, I
think they're using
these more subtle techniques.
It's almost like they
just seem to stop aging.
What about stem cells?
You talked about that fat.
I know they do fat tissue
transplants, right?
Fat tissue transplants.
But also using--
harvesting those
stem cells to be used in
this regenerative process.
How does that work,
and what does it do?
And how is it used in the
field of beauty regeneration?
>>ADELSON: Sure.
So if you look at--
we have stem cells
in all the tissues in
our body, and their role
is to maintain the health
of their microenvironment.
So how healthy
you are is largely
determined by the function
of your stem cells
and the population
of stem cells.
So when we talk about the skin
of the face, for instance,
we have Botox.
And what Botox does is
it paralyzes the muscles
so you're unable to make these
lines of facial expression.
>>REGINA: You mean
these, my frownies?
I've got nice, deep
frownies there.
[LAUGHS] Yep, I know.
>>ADELSON: And
then similarly you
have fillers, which
is to fill volume.
But what neither
of those address
is the actual health of
the skin, the hydration
and elasticity of the skin.
And I don't perform
cosmetic procedures,
but my practice partner,
Dr. Amy Killen, does.
And frequently we'll
do cases together
where I do the
musculoskeletal structures
and she does the
skin of the face.
And when you inject stem cells
into the skin of the face,
it improves elasticity
and hydration,
which doesn't give sort
of this dramatic look.
People just sort
of say, huh, you--
>>REGINA: Look a little fresher.
Slept well.
>>ADELSON: Are you-- that's
exactly what they say.
That's exactly--
>>REGINA: Are you rest--
You look rested.
>>ADELSON: That's exactly right.
>>REGINA: So they're mostly
used in the skin then,
and the other things
are used for building.
>>ADELSON: Well, there's
actual fat transfers,
and that's using
fat as a filler,
and that's sort of more in
the realm of cosmetic surgery.
But I'm just talking
about putting skin--
stem cells in the skin.
>>REGINA: Do they
inject it in the skin?
>>ADELSON: Inject
it into the skin.
She uses a microneedling
afterwards,
and then she usually uses
some sort of light therapy.
The other two
treatments that she does
is the scalp, which
thickens the hair follicles.
>>REGINA: Oh, so that
might be popular with men.
More popular with men.
>>ADELSON: Oh, it's
equally popular with women
with thinning hair.
Sure.
Yeah.
So just a thick--
now, it doesn't make
you grow new hair follicles.
But if you have follicles
that are producing
thin hair follicles, then--
or thin hair shafts, then
it thickens those shafts.
The other area is in
sexual optimization.
>>REGINA: How so?
>>ADELSON: She injects
in women in the vagina
and men in the penis.
What that does is in
the women, it improves--
just like with the face,
improves hydration--
>>REGINA: Elasticity.
>>ADELSON: Elasticity.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ADELSON: Right.
So that's when women have
painful sex, for instance,
it's usually--
it's loss of
elasticity and dryness.
>>REGINA: So you can
use stem cells for that?
>>ADELSON: Yes.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>ADELSON: Yes, yes.
And then in men,
erectile dysfunction
is a circulatory issue.
It's loss of-- it's loss
of microcirculation.
So just like we were talking
about earlier when you inject
in the penis, it
triggers the growth
of these new, healthy
blood vessels,
thereby directly
treating or preventing
erectile dysfunction.
>>REGINA: Wow.
I hadn't even
heard of these yet.
This is amazing.
OK.
So you're saying here,
we talked about this
a little earlier that once
you hit over 40 in particular,
you start losing--
you start losing the advantage
of the stem cells' ability
to produce.
We talked about the
exosomes, right?
OK.
All right.
I'm just trying to pay
attention and follow you here.
So if you're over 40 years old--
and our demographic is anywhere
from 20s up to 60s, even 70, and
people are interested in this--
then you would
really kind of have
to look at using other
people's base stem cell?
>>ADELSON: Well, pretty much
with everybody now we combine.
I do what--
>>REGINA: You do the combination
you spoke of earlier?
>>ADELSON: Yes, what
I affectionately would
call the kitchen sink approach.
>>REGINA: So the adipose
tissue drawn ones
combined with bone marrow.
>>ADELSON: Combined
with exosomes.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
>>ADELSON: I find that even be--
so on the one hand, what I
found is when we supplement
a person's own stem cells with
exosomes, the thing that I
noticed sort of long
term is the older people
react like the younger people.
But even in the younger
people what I notice is people
have much less
post-procedure pain.
We do all our procedures
under IV sedation administered
by a board-certified
anesthesiologist,
so we put people to sleep.
It's very painful to go through.
There's no reason to
go through it awake.
>>REGINA: Oh,
like, bone marrow--
>>ADELSON: All of it.
All of it.
Disc injections.
Like, all of it.
It's--
>>REGINA: I would think so.
Better to be asleep.
>>ADELSON: Yeah, it's
much better to be--
I don't need your help.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS] Yeah.
>>ADELSON: Yeah.
So people, before I started
using exosomes, when people
would wake up, about
one in 10, one in 20
would wake up with
quite a bit of pain.
Quite a bit sore in the
area that we treated.
Once I started using
exosomes, what I found
is that almost entirely stopped.
The exosomes have a very strong
anti-inflammatory property,
and I think that's the cause.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
OK.
Let's move on then.
Thank you for explaining this,
and I have a much better idea
of how this works myself.
And I love your kitchen
sink approach to it.
It works, it sounds like.
Now here, you're talking
about you appreciating David--
you appreciate
David Asprey's work,
and I have interviewed
him before.
But now he's on to stem cells.
What's this called?
It's called the full-body
stem cell makeover.
What's that all about?
Why does it intrigue you?
Because Dave Asprey's out there.
He's a good marketer,
so bunch of people
will start hearing about this.
What's his take on it,
what's he offering,
and what are you intrigued with?
>>ADELSON: Sure.
So when I started
doing stem cells,
I was mostly getting
ranchers and oilfield workers
and cowboys.
I was getting these people who
literally just had arthritis
throughout their entire bodies.
So I started doing--
>>REGINA: Ever get
anyone from the rodeo?
>>ADELSON: Oh, I had
quite a few rodeo--
>>REGINA: Did you?
Oh my god.
>>ADELSON: I had
quite a few rodeo--
>>REGINA: Oh my god.
>>ADELSON: Not so much active,
but more the retired guys.
>>REGINA: Well-- oh, yeah
the problem's afterward.
>>ADELSON: Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: I can't even fathom.
>>ADELSON: They're busted up
cowboys and they have arthritis
throughout their entire--
>>REGINA: So you worked
on the really tough cases.
>>ADELSON: Mostly, yeah.
>>REGINA: Continue
what you were saying.
Sorry to interrupt.
>>ADELSON: And that's just sort
of how my practice evolved,
because in the early days,
you know, back in 2010, 2011,
no one had heard of stem cells.
Well, there was this large
animal vet in Wyoming who
was doing stem cells on horses.
And these cowboys
would say, well,
can't you just do it on me?
And he'd say, no, I can't.
But there's a guy in
Park City who does it.
So he was sending
me all these people.
So that's why I sort of were
getting all these busted
up cowboys.
And I do these big treatments.
I'd do their whole spine and
both shoulders and both hips--
>>REGINA: Their legs.
Their-- yeah, the whole--
>>ADELSON: And I
sort of just jokingly
started calling it the
full-body stem cell makeover.
So then in 2016-- early 2016,
Dave Asprey became a patient.
And if you know
Dave Asprey, his--
>>REGINA: Bulletproof coffee.
That's what most people
associate him with.
>>ADELSON: That's right.
And what he-- his goal
is to live to be 180.
And so I started
getting his devotees.
I started getting
his people in there.
And they are much
more interested
in sort of prevention
and anti-aging
and that sort of thing.
>>REGINA: How do you
approach that where
you have healthy young people?
Where do you start
doing the injections?
>>ADELSON: Well,
that's exactly it.
And then they started
asking me, well,
can't you just
inject my whole body?
And I thought--
>>REGINA: Just mainline it?
Give me an IV?
>>ADELSON: Well, the
thing is if you do an IV,
it doesn't go to the
musculoskeletal structures.
It just-- it goes to the
internal organs, which
is great.
>>REGINA: So what do you do?
>>ADELSON: So I thought,
yeah, actually, I can.
I started thinking about
Dave's goal to live to be 180.
And you know, I think the
oldest recorded living person
made it to 125.
And if you looked
at pictures of them,
they look like a dried up,
arthritic prune, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah, a little raisin.
>>ADELSON: So I was
thinking, in order
to do that, you would have
to be very active right
up to the bitter end,
and that means you
need to have good joint health.
So that was where the true
full-body stem cell makeover
was born, where we just--
whether the person
needs it or not,
do the entire spine
at every level.
Turn the person over.
Both shoulders, both elbows,
both wrists and thumbs,
both knees, both hips,
both ankles, and great--
>>REGINA: Oh my god.
So now you have been
doing this for a while.
A few years.
>>ADELSON: Coming
up on three years.
>>REGINA: What are you seeing?
>>ADELSON: People love it.
People-- I mean, I get
two types of people.
I get the busted up
cowboys who have pain
throughout their entire body.
>>REGINA: And the optimizers.
>>ADELSON: And then I get
the people who don't ever
want to get there.
They just-- and
people really love it.
And people have the
option of having
Amy Killen do all of her stuff.
The cosmetic of the face, the
scalp, and the sexual organs.
>>REGINA: Wow.
This sounds
extraordinarily expensive.
>>ADELSON: Unfortunately, it is.
My center is expensive to run.
I mean, there's--
>>REGINA: Yeah, I mean,
you have to have--
because that's not
covered by your health
insurance or your HMO.
[LAUGHS]
>>ADELSON: No, the full-body
stem cell makeover--
>>REGINA: Oh, god.
I can't even fathom.
>>ADELSON: It is.
So I actually had an experience
on Christmas Eve of 2016.
I was-- I had this
very long year.
Dave Asprey had
become a patient.
My practice suddenly--
>>REGINA: Exploded.
>>ADELSON: Yeah.
I mean, sort of as
old Vidal Sassoon
said, I worked my fingers
to the bone for 20 years
and then became an
overnight success.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>ADELSON: And I was
tired, and I'd been tired
for a couple of months.
And my wife came in and
asked me a question,
and I had lost the
ability to speak.
>>REGINA: Literally.
>>ADELSON: Yeah.
And the right side of my body
was completely paralyzed.
So she took me to the hospital,
and I kept having strokes,
and we couldn't figure out why.
It took about three days to
diagnose it, and it was--
I had a bacterial
infection of my heart
that was kicking up
debris into my brain.
>>REGINA: That
must have scared--
>>ADELSON: So the surgeon
burst into the room.
And he said, well, the
good news is we figured out
why you keep having strokes.
The bad news is you need
aortic valve replacement
in two weeks, which I
found out years later,
it was probably from
bad dental work.
But you know, at the
time, I had no idea.
It just was-- it seemed crazy.
So I had this open heart
surgery with a sternotomy.
They cracked me open.
>>REGINA: And you were only
in your late 40s at that time,
right?
>>ADELSON: Yeah, that's right.
Yeah, that's right.
It was just five years ago.
Or-- yeah, I guess.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ADELSON: Yeah, five years ago.
So the result of having
the surgery was I
experienced pain that was
a 10 on a scale of 10.
And that was a gift.
It didn't feel like
a gift at the time.
But what I realized
is that the ability
to get people out of pain is
the greatest gift imaginable.
So that is what launched my
tithing program, because these
are expensive treatments.
And the greatest advance
in medicine in the world
doesn't do anybody any good
if they can't afford it.
So my tithing program,
one day per month,
I treat people who otherwise
couldn't afford it.
First, we determine
that the person
is living below poverty level.
Right, once we've determined
that, then there's
two pathways for
enrollment in the program.
One is combat service veterans.
If you've served this
country in combat,
I'm happy to do it at no cost.
For people who are not
combat service veterans,
I will do it in exchange
for documentation
of community service hours.
>>REGINA: Wonderful.
>>ADELSON: It's been terrific.
>>REGINA: That is.
That's really--
>>ADELSON: It's so much fun.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And you're so right.
If you've been around people
who-- or if you've had pain,
it just diminishes the
quality of engagement
with life, period.
There's no other way around it.
That's something people
cannot really bypass.
>>ADELSON: Yeah.
Yeah, the thing
about pain is one
of the predictors of longevity
is having a purpose in life.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ADELSON: Well, if your
purpose in life in any way
involves the use of your body,
then being in chronic pain
in a very real way impacts
your purpose in life.
>>REGINA: Absolutely
does, because you just
don't have the juice
to amp up into it.
You know?
The pain is always there,
sidetracking everyone
who is in pain's energy.
I've only had pain a
couple times in my life
for a very short
time, and so I only
have a taste of what
that feeling is like.
But I've witnessed other
people who have chronic pain,
and that's a--
>>ADELSON: It's a curse.
>>REGINA: It's a curse.
And it's wonderful that you're
giving that gift to people,
giving back on that.
That's wonderful.
So let's talk about the future.
And also, you have a
documentary coming out?
OK, I want to hear about that.
The future, where you see
the leading edges going
right now of stem cell therapy.
And then also, a little
bit about your documentary
before we sign off.
>>ADELSON: Sure.
So there's two main categories
of stem cell medicine.
There's what I do, which
is regenerative medicine,
and then there's
tissue engineering.
Where all the exciting
research is happening right now
is in this tissue engineering.
So what that is is somebody
has a badly torn meniscus,
and they actually grow a
meniscus in a laboratory
for surgical implantation.
Same with kidney,
same with livers,
same with potentially hearts.
I mean, you could grow
just about anything.
>>REGINA: That's a holy grail.
>>ADELSON: Within
our lifetime, we
are going to get
to the point where
we're going to create
organs and musculoskeletal
structures in a laboratory
for surgical implantation.
>>REGINA: From our
own base materials?
>>ADELSON: That's yet to be
determined, but probably.
Probably, though.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
So the heart transplant
might look a little
different in the future.
>>ADELSON: That's right.
>>REGINA: Wow.
That's exciting.
>>ADELSON: In my area,
in regenerative medicine,
you know, we're doing great.
We're very happy
with where we are.
What needs to happen now
is for the regulation
to really be solidified,
because there's
quite a bit that's a gray area.
And that needs to--
that all needs to be worked out.
>>REGINA: [SIGH] Yeah.
There's just so much in terms of
oversight that's just not been
thought through properly yet.
So hopefully, knock
on wood, we're
going to have a little bit more
wise guidance in those areas.
And like you say, have
parameters that work better
for humanity rather than just
the pharmaceutical companies
and other high-end procedures
of an allopathic nature.
They seem to get all the
benefit at this time.
So I wish you and
people like you
the best and being able to go--
just fly as far as you can
with this without causing harm.
>>ADELSON: Thank you.
>>REGINA: That's
the best we can do.
And your-- "The Stem Cell
Solution," that documentary.
>>ADELSON: Yeah.
So I created this.
It's been out for
almost a year now.
And I created it because I'm
a naturopathic doctor who
performs these relatively
invasive procedures.
Bone marrow aspirations,
disc injections,
epidural injections,
that sort of thing.
And it's confusing, and
I'm the first to admit
that it's kind of weird.
So I created this film just
to sort of tell my whole story
and how this whole
thing evolved,
because it was quite exciting
there in the early years.
You know, I've traveled through
Central and South America,
learning from the people who'd
been doing it the longest.
And it's just been a
wild ride, and I wanted
to share that with people.
>>REGINA: Wonderful.
Well, thank you so much
for all of your efforts,
passion, due diligence,
and for leaving
a little trail of information
via your documentary for us.
>>ADELSON: Thank you so much.
>>REGINA: Where
can people find it?
>>ADELSON: My website,
Docere Clinics.
D-O-C-E-R-E Clinics,
docereclinics.com.
There's a link to
the film right there.
>>REGINA: OK, very good.
And I'll spell it
again for everyone
to make sure they had
time to write that down.
Thank you so much for joining
us and enlightening us
about this exciting
field of research.
>>ADELSON: Thank you so much.
>>REGINA: Be sure to keep an
eye out for Harry's documentary.
As he said, you can find it,
"The Stem Cell Solution,"
on his website,
which is docere--
D-O-C-E-R-E-- clinics.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]